-------Oracle scan types------------------------------
INDEX UNIQUE SCAN
The INDEX UNIQUE SCAN performs the tree traversal only.
The Oracle database uses this operation if a unique constraint ensures that the search criteria will match no more than one entry.

INDEX RANGE SCAN
The INDEX RANGE SCAN performs the tree traversal and follows the leaf node chain to find all matching entries.
This is the fallback operation if multiple entries could possibly match the search criteria.

TABLE ACCESS BY INDEX ROWID
The TABLE ACCESS BY INDEX ROWID operation retrieves the row from the table.
This operation is (often) performed for every matched record from a preceding index scan operation.

Order of columns in index creation is important. (employee_id, subsidiary_id) It works well when your search criteria
contains employee_id first.

----------------The Query Optimizer----------------------
Cost-based optimizers (CBO) generate many execution plan variations and calculate a cost value for each plan.
The cost calculation is based on the operations in use and the estimated row numbers.
In the end the cost value serves as the benchmark for picking the “best” execution plan.

Rule-based optimizers (RBO) generate the execution plan using a hard-coded rule set.

-------------------FBI(Function based index)-------------------
To support that query, we need an index that covers the actual search term.
That means we do not need an index on LAST_NAME but on UPPER(LAST_NAME):

CREATE INDEX emp_up_name
    ON employees (UPPER(last_name))
An index whose definition contains functions or expressions is a so-called function-based index (FBI).
Instead of copying the column data directly into the index, a function-based index applies the function first and
puts the result into the index. As a result, the index stores the names in all caps notation.

**WARN** Sometimes ORM tools use UPPER and LOWER without the developer’s knowledge. Hibernate, for example,
injects an implicit LOWER for case-insensitive searches.

How can it fetch 100 rows from the table if the preceding index scan returned only 40 rows? The answer is that it can not.
Contradicting estimates like this often indicate problems with the statistics.
In this particular case it is because the Oracle database does not update the table statistics when creating a new index.

The Oracle database maintains the information about the number of distinct column values as part of the table statistics.
These figures are reused if a column is part of multiple indexes.

Statistics for a function-based index (FBI) are also kept on table level as virtual columns.
Although the Oracle database collects the index statistics for new indexes automatically (since release 10g),
it does not update the table statistics. For this reason, the Oracle documentation recommends updating the table
statistics after creating a function-based index:

After creating a function-based index, collect statistics on both the index and its base table using the DBMS_STATS package.
Such statistics will enable Oracle Database to correctly decide when to use the index.
----------------------------Deterministic function based index only------------------------
The query lists all 42-year-old employees. Using a function-based index is an obvious idea for optimizing this query,
but you cannot use the function GET_AGE in an index definition because it is not deterministic. That means the result
of the function call is not fully determined by its parameters. Only functions that always return the same result for
the same parameters—functions that are deterministic—can be indexed.

The reason behind this limitation is simple. When inserting a new row, the database calls the function and stores
the result in the index and there it stays, unchanged. There is no periodic process that updates the index.
The database updates the indexed age only when the date of birth is changed by an update statement.
After the next birthday, the age that is stored in the index will be wrong.

Besides being deterministic, PostgreSQL and the Oracle database require functions to be declared to be deterministic
when used in an index so you have to use the keyword DETERMINISTIC (Oracle) or IMMUTABLE (PostgreSQL).
----------------------------Bind parameters------------------------
When using bind parameters you do not write the actual values but instead insert placeholders into the SQL statement.
That way the statements do not change when executing them with different values.

The cost of the TABLE ACCESS BY INDEX ROWID operation is highly sensitive to the row count estimate.
Selecting ten times as many rows will elevate the cost value by that factor. The overall cost using the index is then
even higher than a full table scan. The optimizer will therefore select the other execution plan for the bigger subsidiary.

When using bind parameters, the optimizer has no concrete values available to determine their frequency.
It then just assumes an equal distribution and always gets the same row count estimates and cost values.
In the end, it will always select the same execution plan.

Tip
Column histograms are most useful if the values are not uniformly distributed.

Deciding to build a specialized or generic execution plan presents a dilemma for the database. Either effort is taken to
evaluate all possible plan variants for each execution in order to always get the best execution plan or the optimization
overhead is saved and a cached execution plan is used whenever possible—accepting the risk of using a suboptimal
execution plan. The quandary is that the database does not know if the full optimization cycle delivers a different
execution plan without actually doing the full optimization. Database vendors try to solve this dilemma with heuristic
methods—but with very limited success.
----------------------------Range scan------------------------
The biggest performance risk of an INDEX RANGE SCAN is the leaf node traversal. It is therefore the golden rule of
indexing to keep the scanned index range as small as possible.
An index on DATE_OF_BIRTH is only scanned in the specified range. The scan starts at the first date and ends at the second.

Of course an ideal index has to cover both columns, but the question is in which order?
The index on DATE_OF_BIRTH and SUBSIDIARY_ID - not optimal.

The index is ordered by birth dates first. Only if two employees were born on the same day is the SUBSIDIARY_ID used to
sort these records. The query, however, covers a date range. The ordering of SUBSIDIARY_ID is therefore useless during
tree traversal.
The picture looks entirely different when reversing the column order.
Rule of thumb: index for equality first—then for ranges.
The access predicates are the start and stop conditions for an index lookup. They define the scanned index range.
Index filter predicates are applied during the leaf node traversal only. They do not narrow the scanned index range.
-------------------------Like and Wild card-------------------------
The following example uses the % wild card in the middle of the search term:
SELECT first_name, last_name, date_of_birth
  FROM employees
 WHERE UPPER(last_name) LIKE 'WIN%D'

LIKE filters can only use the characters before the first wild card during tree traversal. The remaining characters are
just filter predicates that do not narrow the scanned index range. A single LIKE expression can therefore contain two
predicate types: (1) the part before the first wild card as an access predicate;
(2) the other characters as a filter predicate.

Only the part before the first wild card serves as an access predicate.
The remaining characters do not narrow the scanned index range—non-matching entries are just left out of the result.
Avoid LIKE expressions with leading wildcards (e.g., '%TERM').

How can you index a LIKE search that has only one wild card at the beginning of the search term ('%TERM')?
- Answer: Reverse column value

-------------------------Index Merge - Combining Multiple Indexes-------------------------
Nevertheless there are queries where a single index cannot do a perfect job, no matter how you define the index; e.g.,
queries with two or more independent range conditions as in the following example:

SELECT first_name, last_name, date_of_birth
  FROM employees
 WHERE UPPER(last_name) < ?
   AND date_of_birth <?
It is impossible to define a B-tree index that would support this query without filter predicates.
For an explanation, you need to remember that an index is a linked list.


-------------------------Partial Indexes - Indexing Selected Rows-------------------------
We can optimize this query with a two-column index. Considering this query only, the column order does not matter
because there is no range condition.
CREATE INDEX messages_todo
          ON messages (receiver, processed)

The index fulfills its purpose, but it includes many rows that are never searched, namely all the messages that
were already processed. Due to the logarithmic scalability the index nevertheless makes the query very fast even
though it wastes a lot of disk space.

With partial indexing you can limit the index to include only the unprocessed messages.
The syntax for this is surprisingly simple: a where clause.
CREATE INDEX messages_todo
          ON messages (receiver)
       WHERE processed = 'N'

-------------------------NULL in the Oracle Database-------------------------
The SQL standard does not define NULL as a value but rather as a placeholder for a missing or unknown value.
Consequently, no value can be NULL. Instead the Oracle database treats an empty string as NULL.

To add to the confusion, there is even a case when the Oracle database treats NULL as empty string.
No matter where you look, an empty string is never NULL…except in the Oracle database.

The Oracle database does not include rows in an index if all indexed columns are NULL. That means that every index is a partial index—like having a where clause:
CREATE INDEX idx
          ON tbl (A, B, C, ...)
       WHERE A IS NOT NULL
          OR B IS NOT NULL
          OR C IS NOT NULL
             ...
As a consequence, the index cannot support a query for records where DATE_OF_BIRTH IS NULL:

Nevertheless, the record is inserted into a concatenated index if at least one index column is not NULL:

CREATE INDEX demo_null
          ON employees (subsidiary_id, date_of_birth)
The above created row is added to the index because the SUBSIDIARY_ID is not NULL. This index can thus support a query for all employees of a specific subsidiary that have no DATE_OF_BIRTH value:

SELECT first_name, last_name
  FROM employees
 WHERE subsidiary_id = ?
   AND date_of_birth IS NULL
Please note that the index covers the entire where clause; all filters are used as access predicates during the INDEX RANGE SCAN.
We can extend this concept for the original query to find all records where DATE_OF_BIRTH IS NULL. For that, the DATE_OF_BIRTH column has to be the leftmost column in the index so that it can be used as access predicate. Although we do not need a second index column for the query itself, we add another column that can never be NULL to make sure the index has all rows. We can use any column that has a NOT NULL constraint, like SUBSIDIARY_ID, for that purpose.

Alternatively, we can use a constant expression that can never be NULL. That makes sure the index has all rows—even if DATE_OF_BIRTH is NULL.

DROP INDEX emp_dob
CREATE INDEX emp_dob ON employees (date_of_birth, 'X')
Technically, this index is a function-based index. This example also disproves the myth that the Oracle database cannot index NULL.

The following index supports the query only if the column LAST_NAME has a NOT NULL constraint:

DROP INDEX emp_dob
CREATE INDEX emp_dob_name
          ON employees (date_of_birth, last_name)
SELECT *
  FROM employees
 WHERE date_of_birth IS NULL
Removing the NOT NULL constraint renders the index unusable for this query:

ALTER TABLE employees MODIFY last_name NULL
SELECT *
  FROM employees
 WHERE date_of_birth IS NULL

Besides NOT NULL constraints, the database also knows that constant expressions like in the previous section cannot become NULL.

CREATE INDEX emp_dob_bb
    ON employees (date_of_birth, blackbox(employee_id))

The function name BLACKBOX emphasizes the fact that the optimizer has no idea what the function does
(see “Case-Insensitive Search Using UPPER or LOWER”). We can see that the function passes the input value straight through,
but for the database it is just a function that returns a number. The NOT NULL property of the parameter is lost.
Although the index must have all rows, the database does not know that so it cannot use the index for the query.

If you know that the function never returns NULL, as in this example, you can change the query to reflect that:

SELECT *
  FROM employees
 WHERE date_of_birth IS NULL
   AND blackbox(employee_id) IS NOT NULL;

The strange way the Oracle database handles NULL in indexes can be used to emulate partial indexes.
For that, we just have to use NULL for rows that should not be indexed.

To demonstrate, we emulate the following partial index:

CREATE INDEX messages_todo
          ON messages (receiver)
       WHERE processed = 'N'
First, we need a function that returns the RECEIVER value only if the PROCESSED value is 'N'.

CREATE OR REPLACE
FUNCTION pi_processed(processed CHAR, receiver NUMBER)
RETURN NUMBER
DETERMINISTIC
AS BEGIN
   IF processed IN ('N') THEN
      RETURN receiver;
   ELSE
      RETURN NULL;
   END IF;
END

Now we can create an index that contains only the rows having PROCESSED='N'.

CREATE INDEX messages_todo
          ON messages (pi_processed(processed, receiver))
To use the index, you must use the indexed expression in the query:

SELECT message
  FROM messages
 WHERE pi_processed(processed, receiver) = ?


Credits: https://use-the-index-luke.com